# Install and configure Visual Studio Code

Learn how to configure Visual Studio Code for C# and how to use this
professional IDE to create and run console applications.

## Introduction

**Software development is more than just writing code**, it's a process. Larger
coding projects can take months or even years to complete and can be complex.
The process of writing, debugging, testing, updating/versioning, and releasing
code is a significant undertaking. To help with this process, developers use a
specialized tool known as integrated development environments (IDEs). IDEs are
software applications that provide a comprehensive set of tools to help
developers write, test, and release code. IDEs are designed to make the process
of writing code easier and more efficient.

An IDE typically includes a suite of tools that support the software development
process from beginning to end, a process known as the development lifecycle. The
IDE tools enable the developer to work more efficiently and can help the
developer, or team of developers, to write, debug, test, publish,  and version
their code more easily. A good IDE is a programmer's best friend.

Suppose you're interested in getting started with C# application development.
Your first step is to select a programming environment. After researching the
available options online, you determine that Visual Studio Code is one of the
most popular IDEs among C# developers. You're happy to see that Visual Studio
Code is a full-featured IDE that's quick and easy to install, and that it
supports numerous extensions to enhance developer productivity. You also take a
look at the full Visual Studio product, which provides even more features for
professional developers. Both products include a free option. After consulting a
developer friend you decide that Visual Studio Code will provide all of the
tools you need to get started. You make plans to begin setting up your
development environment with Visual Studio Code.

In this module, you install Visual Studio Code and configure the IDE to meet
your coding requirements. You'll learn about the various panels and menus that
comprise the Visual Studio Code IDE, as well as how and when yo use them. Most
importantly, you'll learn how to configure Visual Studio Code for C# development
and how to create, build, run and update a C# console application in Visual
Studio Code.

By the end of this module, you'll be able to use Visual Studio Code to create
and run C# console applications.

### Learning objectives

In this module, you will:

- Download and install Visual Studio Code
- Examine the Visual Studio Code IDE
- Configure Visual Studio Code for C# development
- Install the .NET runtime library
- Build and run a C# console application in Visual Studio Code

## Examine the Visual Studio Code interface

At its core, Visual Studio Code is a text editor. It's designed to make it easy
to write and edit code. However, Visual Studio Code is much more than a text
editor. It's a full-featured IDE that provides a comprehensive set of tools to
help developers write, test, and release code. Visual Studio Code is designed to
make the process of writing code easier and more efficient.

### Examine the main areas of the user interface

The following diagram shows the main areas of the Visual Studio Code user
interface.

![VsCode
UI](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/modules/install-configure-visual-studio-code/media/visual-studio-code-user-interface-labels.png)

A - The Activity Bar is the narrow vertical bar located on the far left-hand
side of the window. The Activity bar lets you switch between views (such as
Explorer or Extensions) and gives you other context-specific indicators.

B - The Side Bar contains views that provide tools and resources. The Side Bar
views (such as EXPLORER) are very helpful when you're working on a code project.

C - The Editor is the area used to edit your files. You can open as many editors
as you like side by side vertically and horizontally.

D - The Panel area is used to display different panels below the editor region
for output or debug information, errors and warnings, or an integrated terminal.

E - The Status Bar is the horizontal bar along the bottom of the window that
displays information about the opened project and the files you edit.

F - The Main Menu is the menu interface at the top of the application window.
The menu options enable you to save, edit, and run your code (and much more).

As you become more proficient with Visual Studio Code, you'll be working in the
screen areas described. To start out, however, the most important areas for you
to remember the Activity Bar, the Side Bar, and the Editor. The Activity Bar and
Side Bar are used to navigate between files and to access the various tools and
resources that Visual Studio Code provides. The Editor is where you'll write and
edit your code. The Side bar displays tools and options, and the Editor displays
the information that you edit, usually your code.